
h2. TODO

* pseudocode for quadtree
* explain/understand quadtree. read code
* implement multiple force on bubble chart
* code for bubbles as images
* add clustered forces
* code for grid layout
* code for force labels
* figure out ending
* implement ending
* add sources slides

h2. Slide Ideas

* Intro to D3 Force "api":https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Force-Layout
** what makes a force directed layout - just bubbles
** source code for basic force
** multiple bubbles - "this demo":http://bl.ocks.org/1062383 has fun fly in
** gravity
** charge

* Bubble Chart
** gates bubble chart example?
** bubble chart code
** bubble chart example with overlap
** custom charge per node
** correct bubble chart
** nyt example?
** multiple custom forces

* Custom Forces
** node data - show what data nodes have
** code for custom tick force
** example - no alpha
** simulated annealing
** alpha
** example - alpha
** gates example
** multiple forces working - nyt example
** add version of gates that includes this tweak?

* Collision Detection
** nyt bubble cloud example
** book bubble cloud example
** basic collision code
** add mouse like in: http://bl.ocks.org/GerHobbelt/3116713 
** quadtrees
** quadtree view
** quadtree code
** book example
** word cloud quote

* Custom Nodes
** other symbols example: http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/1062383
** images example: http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/950642
** states force directed example: http://mbostock.github.com/d3/talk/20111018/force-states.html

* Nodes & Edges
** basic example
** code for basic example
** edge link
** edge strength
** data based edge strength
** racial divide map
** edge custom styles?
** curved edges?: http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4600693
** adding and removing edges
** senate social network: http://news.yahoo.com/senate-social-network-diagram-mcconnell-mean-girls-000513361.html
** game of thrones places: http://www.jeromecukier.net/projects/agot/places.html
** add/remove edges code

* Custom Layouts
** use of custom force
** moving between layouts
** flowing data example
** stowers collaboration example
** circle layout code
** spiral layout code?
** sunflower layout?

* More Custom Layouts
** clustered forces layout: http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/1747543
** grid layout: http://moritzstefaner.github.com/gridexperiments/
** force directed labels?
** my other stowers attempts?

* Big Finish?!?
** Could be grid layout with NYC metro locations
** could be Nature of Code basic example... 

** hull on top of particle emitter ... synced to music?
** planaira moving about?

h2. Network Ideas

h3. big finish

d3 flock: 
https://github.com/shuw/flock/blob/master/assets/js/example.coffee

jason davies alpha shape:
http://bl.ocks.org/jasondavies/1554783

convex hull
http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4341699

h3. humor

tmcw midwest tweet:
https://twitter.com/tmcw/status/292762206855106560

h3. strange expanding nodes

http://bl.ocks.org/GerHobbelt/3104394

just expanding nodes:
http://bl.ocks.org/GerHobbelt/3071239

h3. Lynn's delicious

"bookmarks":https://delicious.com/arnicas/networks+d3

h3. breaking rank

"Breaking rank - parliment":http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/breaking-rank-how-often-do-mps-vote-against-their-own-party/article8141646/

h3. collision detection

"mikes talk":http://mbostock.github.com/d3/talk/20111018/collision.html

h3. arboretum

"ascession frequency":http://arbonauts.nafster.com/site/project-count-ages.html

* interesting pop-in effect
* large spectrum of bubble sizes

h3. Bubble cloud

"my version":http://vallandingham.me/bubble_cloud/

"shape of my library":http://shapeofmylibrary.com/ - also featured by @alignedleft ?

* Sarah Groff-Palermo
* @supersgp

h3. Custom Gravity

"custom gravity":http://bl.ocks.org/2024456

h3. Location and force layouts

"force directed states":http://mbostock.github.com/d3/talk/20111018/force-states.html

"racial divide":http://vallandingham.me/visualizing_the_racial_divide.html

h3. network editors

"mikes drawer":http://bl.ocks.org/929623

"draw editor":http://bl.ocks.org/4370043

"strange one with boxes":http://hci-user-advocate.blogspot.com/2012/06/interactive-d3-experiments.html

h3. Grided Forced Layout

"grid layout":http://moritzstefaner.github.com/gridexperiments/

* Moritz
* great idea
* subway map?

h3. Other bubles

"NYT budget":http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/02/13/us/politics/2013-budget-proposal-graphic.html

"hackernews":http://fanfarefantastique.com/vishna/#newest

h3. multiple sclerosis bubblechart

"bubble chart":http://www.mgrafit.com/00-projects/proj01-MSTrials/MStrials.html

* uses similar code as NYT visualization
* lots of custom locations

h3. Octocat force layout

"blocks link":http://bl.ocks.org/4527513

"Gist":https://gist.github.com/christophermanning/4527513

* has controls to modify components of force

<pre>
var frictionChanger = fl.add(config, "friction", 0, 1)
frictionChanger.onChange(function(value) {
  force.friction(value)
  force.start()
})
</pre>

looks like it uses "dat-gui":http://code.google.com/p/dat-gui/

h3. visual complexity

"website":http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/

"NYC subway times":http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/project_details.cfm?id=757&index=757&domain=

* maybe use with grided layouts?

"circle of trust":http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/project_details.cfm?id=769&index=769&domain=

* looks a lot like my *stowers experiments*

*NOTE:* Use some of the Stowers layouts as examples

h3. bubbles and images

"images on bubbles":http://bl.ocks.org/950642


h3. Edge styling

"fancy curved tutorial":http://blog.stephenboak.com/2012/06/15/d3-flow-vis-tutorial.html

"widths of edges":http://www.jasondavies.com/random-arboretum/

h3. Idea: use grid layout for time scale map

shapefiles for NYC subway: http://spatialityblog.com/2010/07/08/mta-gis-data-update/#datalinks

subway station lat/lon: http://aautar.digital-radiation.com/blog/?p=3902

commute times: http://datagardenblog.net/2012/03/3/nyc-time-map-2/

subway data: http://datamine.mta.info/

distance matrix: https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript/distancematrix


buoyancy original code:

    // 
    buoyancy: function(alpha) {
      var that = this;
      return function(d){
          // d.y -= 1000 * alpha * alpha * alpha * d.changeCategory
          
          // if (d.changeCategory >= 0) {
          //   d.y -= 1000 * alpha * alpha * alpha
          // } else {
          //   d.y += 1000 * alpha * alpha * alpha
          // }
          
          
          var targetY = that.centerY - (d.changeCategory / 3) * that.boundingRadius
          d.y = d.y + (targetY - d.y) * (that.defaultGravity) * alpha * alpha * alpha * 100
          
          
          
      };
    },
    

